Far out in the uncharted backwaters of the unfashionable end of the western
spiral arm of the Galaxy lies a small unregarded yellow sun. Orbiting
this at a distance of roughly ninety-two million miles is an utterly insignifi-
cant little blue green planet whose ape-descended life forms are so amazingly
primitive that they still think digital watches are a pretty neat idea.
This planet has – or rather had – a problem, which was this: most of the
people on it were unhappy for pretty much of the time. Many solutions were
suggested for this problem, but most of these were largely concerned with the
movements of small green pieces of paper, which is odd because on the whole
it wasn’t the small green pieces of paper that were unhappy.
And so the problem remained; lots of the people were mean, and most of
them were miserable, even the ones with digital watches.
Many were increasingly of the opinion that they’d all made a big mistake
in coming down from the trees in the first place. And some said that even the
trees had been a bad move, and that no one should ever have left the oceans.
And then, one Thursday, nearly two thousand years after one man had
been nailed to a tree for saying how great it would be to be nice to people
for a change, one girl sitting on her own in a small cafe in Rickmansworth
suddenly realized what it was that had been going wrong all this time, and she
finally knew how the world could be made a good and happy place. This time
it was right, it would work, and no one would have to get nailed to anything.
Sadly, however, before she could get to a phone to tell anyone about it, a
terribly stupid catastrophe occurred, and the idea was lost forever.
This is not her story.
But it is the story of that terrible stupid catastrophe and some of its
consequences.
It is also the story of a book, a book called The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the
Galaxy – not an Earth book, never published on Earth, and until the terrible
catastrophe occurred, never seen or heard of by any Earthman.
Nevertheless, a wholly remarkable book.
In fact it was probably the most remarkable book ever to come out of the
great publishing houses of Ursa Minor – of which no Earthman had ever heard
either.
Not only is it a wholly remarkable book, it is also a highly successful one
– more popular than the Celestial Home Care Omnibus, better selling than
Fifty More Things to do in Zero Gravity, and more controversial than Oolon
Colluphid’s trilogy of philosophical blockbusters Where God Went Wrong,
Some More of God’s Greatest Mistakes and Who is this God Person Anyway?
In many of the more relaxed civilizations on the Outer Eastern Rim of the
Galaxy, the Hitchhiker’s Guide has already supplanted the great Encyclopedia
Galactica as the standard repository of all knowledge and wisdom, for though
it has many omissions and contains much that is apocryphal, or at least wildly
inaccurate, it scores over the older, more pedestrian work in two important
respects.
First, it is slightly cheaper; and secondly it has the words Don’t Panic
inscribed in large friendly letters on its cover.
But the story of this terrible, stupid Thursday, the story of its extraordinary
consequences, and the story of how these consequences are inextricably
intertwined with this remarkable book begins very simply.
It begins with a house.
The house stood on a slight rise just on the edge of the village. It stood on
its own and looked over a broad spread of West Country farmland. Not a
remarkable house by any means – it was about thirty years old, squattish,
squarish, made of brick, and had four windows set in the front of a size and
proportion which more or less exactly failed to please the eye.
The only person for whom the house was in any way special was Arthur
Dent, and that was only because it happened to be the one he lived in. He
had lived in it for about three years, ever since he had moved out of London
because it made him nervous and irritable. He was about thirty as well,
dark haired and never quite at ease with himself. The thing that used to
worry him most was the fact that people always used to ask him what he
was looking so worried about. He worked in local radio which he always used
to tell his friends was a lot more interesting than they probably thought. It
was, too – most of his friends worked in advertising.
On Wednesday night it had rained very heavily, the lane was wet and
muddy, but the Thursday morning sun was bright and clear as it shone on
Arthur Dent’s house for what was to be the last time
It hadn’t properly registered with Arthur that the council wanted to
knock down his house and build an bypass instead.
At eight o’clock on Thursday morning Arthur didn’t feel very good. He
woke up blearily, got up, wandered blearily round his room, opened a window,
saw a bulldozer, found his slippers, and stomped off to the bathroom to wash.
Toothpaste on the brush – so. Scrub.
Shaving mirror – pointing at the ceiling. He adjusted it. For a moment
it reflected a second bulldozer through the bathroom window. Properly adjusted,
it reflected Arthur Dent’s bristles. He shaved them off, washed, dried,
and stomped off to the kitchen to find something pleasant to put in his mouth.
Kettle, plug, fridge, milk, coffee. Yawn.
The word bulldozer wandered through his mind for a moment in search
of something to connect with.
The bulldozer outside the kitchen window was quite a big one.
He stared at it. ”Yellow,” he thought and stomped off back to his bedroom
to get dressed.
Passing the bathroom he stopped to drink a large glass of water, and
another. He began to suspect that he was hung over. Why was he hung
over? Had he been drinking the night before? He supposed that he must
have been. He caught a glint in the shaving mirror. ”Yellow,” he thought
and stomped on to the bedroom.
He stood and thought. The pub, he thought. Oh dear, the pub. He
vaguely remembered being angry, angry about something that seemed important.
He’d been telling people about it, telling people about it at great
length, he rather suspected: his clearest visual recollection was of glazed
looks on other people’s faces. Something about a new bypass he had just
found out about. It had been in the pipeline for months only no one seemed
to have known about it. Ridiculous. He took a swig of water. It would sort
itself out, he’d decided, no one wanted a bypass, the council didn’t have a
leg to stand on. It would sort itself out.
God what a terrible hangover it had earned him though. He looked
at himself in the wardrobe mirror. He stuck out his tongue. ”Yellow,” he
thought. The word yellow wandered through his mind in search of something
to connect with.
Fifteen seconds later he was out of the house and lying in front of a big
yellow bulldozer that was advancing up his garden path.
Mr. L. Prosser was, as they say, only human. In other words he was a
carbon-based life form descended from an ape. More specifically he was forty,
fat and shabby and worked for the local council. Curiously enough, though
he didn’t know it, he was also a direct male-line descendant of Genghis Khan,
though intervening generations and racial mixing had so juggled his genes
that he had no discernible Mongoloid characteristics, and the only vestiges
left in Mr. L. Prosser of his mighty ancestry were a pronounced stoutness
about the tum and a predilection for little fur hats.
He was by no means a great warrior: in fact he was a nervous worried
man. Today he was particularly nervous and worried because something had
gone seriously wrong with his job – which was to see that Arthur Dent’s
house got cleared out of the way before the day was out.
Bypasses are devices which allow some people to drive from point A to
point B very fast whilst other people dash from point B to point A very fast.
People living at point C, being a point directly in between, are often given
to wonder what’s so great about point A that so many people of point B are
so keen to get there, and what’s so great about point B that so many people
of point A are so keen to get there. They often wish that people would just
once and for all work out where the hell they wanted to be.
Mr. Prosser wanted to be at point D. Point D wasn’t anywhere in particular,
it was just any convenient point a very long way from points A, B and
C. He would have a nice little cottage at point D, with axes over the door,
and spend a pleasant amount of time at point E, which would be the nearest
pub to point D. His wife of course wanted climbing roses, but he wanted
axes. He didn’t know why – he just liked axes. He flushed hotly under the
derisive grins of the bulldozer drivers.
He shifted his weight from foot to foot, but it was equally uncomfortable
on each. Obviously somebody had been appallingly incompetent and he
hoped to God it wasn’t him.
Mr. Prosser’s mouth opened and closed a couple of times while his mind
was for a moment filled with inexplicable but terribly attractive visions of
Arthur Dent’s house being consumed with fire and Arthur himself running
screaming from the blazing ruin with at least three hefty spears protruding
from his back. Mr. Prosser was often bothered with visions like these and
they made him feel very nervous. He stuttered for a moment and then pulled
himself together.
This friend of his had first arrived on the planet some fifteen Earth years
previously, and he had worked hard to blend himself into Earth society –
with, it must be said, some success. For instance he had spent those fifteen
years pretending to be an out of work actor, which was plausible enough.
He had made one careless blunder though, because he had skimped a bit
on his preparatory research. The information he had gathered had led him
to choose the name ”Ford Prefect” as being nicely inconspicuous.
He was not conspicuously tall, his features were striking but not conspicuously
handsome. His hair was wiry and gingerish and brushed backwards
from the temples. His skin seemed to be pulled backwards from the nose.
There was something very slightly odd about him, but it was difficult to say
what it was. Perhaps it was that his eyes didn’t blink often enough and
when you talked to him for any length of time your eyes began involuntarily
to water on his behalf. Perhaps it was that he smiled slightly too broadly
and gave people the unnerving impression that he was about to go for their
neck.
He struck most of the friends he had made on Earth as an eccentric, but
a harmless one – an unruly boozer with some oddish habits. For instance he
would often gatecrash university parties, get badly drunk and start making
fun of any astrophysicist he could find till he got thrown out.
Sometimes he would get seized with oddly distracted moods and stare
into the sky as if hypnotized until someone asked him what he was doing.
Then he would start guiltily for a moment, relax and grin.
”Oh, just looking for flying saucers,” he would joke and everyone would
laugh and ask him what sort of flying saucers he was looking for.
”Green ones!” he would reply with a wicked grin, laugh wildly for a
moment and then suddenly lunge for the nearest bar and buy an enormous
round of drinks.
Evenings like this usually ended badly. Ford would get out of his skull
on whisky, huddle into a corner with some girl and explain to her in slurred
phrases that honestly the colour of the flying saucers didn’t matter that much
really.
Ford Prefect was desperate that any flying saucer at all would arrive soon
because fifteen years was a long time to get stranded anywhere, particularly
somewhere as mindboggingly dull as the Earth.
Ford wished that a flying saucer would arrive soon because he knew how
to flag flying saucers down and get lifts from them. He knew how to see the
Marvels of the Universe for less than thirty Altairan dollars a day.
In fact, Ford Prefect was a roving researcher for that wholly remarkable
book The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy.
Human beings are great adaptors, and by lunchtime life in the environs
of Arthur’s house had settled into a steady routine. It was Arthur’s accepted
role to lie squelching in the mud making occasional demands to see his lawyer,
his mother or a good book; it was Mr. Prosser’s accepted role to tackle
Arthur with the occasional new ploy such as the For the Public Good talk,
the March of Progress talk, the They Knocked My House Down Once You
Know, Never Looked Back talk and various other cajoleries and threats; and
it was the bulldozer drivers’ accepted role to sit around drinking coffee and
experimenting with union regulations to see how they could turn the situation
to their financial advantage.
The Earth moved slowly in its diurnal course.
The sun was beginning to dry out the mud Arthur lay in.
A shadow moved across him again.
Between them would be placed a bottle of Janx Spirit (as immortalized
in that ancient Orion mining song ”Oh don’t give me none more of that Old
Janx Spirit/ No, don’t you give me none more of that Old Janx Spirit/ For
my head will fly, my tongue will lie, my eyes will fry and I may die/ Won’t
you pour me one more of that sinful Old Janx Spirit”).
Each of the two contestants would then concentrate their will on the
bottle and attempt to tip it and pour spirit into the glass of his opponent –
who would then have to drink it.
The bottle would then be refilled. The game would be played again. And
again.
Once you started to lose you would probably keep losing, because one of
the effects of Janx spirit is to depress telepsychic power.
As soon as a predetermined quantity had been consumed, the final loser
would have to perform a forfeit, which was usually obscenely biological.
Ford Prefect usually played to lose.
Ford stared at Arthur, who began to think that perhaps he did want to
go to the Horse and Groom after all.
”But what about my house . . . ?” he asked plaintively.
Ford looked across to Mr. Prosser, and suddenly a wicked thought struck
him.
Here’s what the Encyclopedia Galactica has to say about alcohol. It says that
alcohol is a colourless volatile liquid formed by the fermentation of sugars and
also notes its intoxicating effect on certain carbon-based life forms.
The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy also mentions alcohol. It says that
the best drink in existence is the Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster.
It says that the effect of a Pan Galactic Gargle Blaster is like having your
brains smashed out by a slice of lemon wrapped round a large gold brick.
The Guide also tells you on which planets the best Pan Galactic Gargle
Blasters are mixed, how much you can expect to pay for one and what
voluntary organizations exist to help you rehabilitate afterwards.
The Guide even tells you how you can mix one yourself.
Take the juice from one bottle of that Ol’ Janx Spirit, it says.
Pour into it one measure of water from the seas of Santraginus V – Oh
that Santraginean sea water, it says. Oh, those Santraginean fish!
Allow three cubes of Arcturan Mega-gin to melt into the mixture (it must
be properly iced or the benzine is lost).
Allow four litres of Fallian marsh gas to bubble through it, in memory of
all those happy Hikers who have died of pleasure in the Marshes of Fallia.
Over the back of a silver spoon float a measure of Qualactin Hypermint
extract, redolent of all the heady odours of the dark Qualactin Zones, subtle
sweet and mystic.
Drop in the tooth of an Algolian Suntiger. Watch it dissolve, spreading
the fires of the Algolian Suns deep into the heart of the drink.
Sprinkle Zamphuor.
Add an olive.
None of them had, and none of them could understand what he was
smiling at them for.
A man sitting next to Ford at the bar looked at the two men, looked at
the six pints, did a swift burst of mental arithmetic, arrived at an answer he
liked and grinned a stupid hopeful grin at them.
The only place they registered at all was on a small black device called a
Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic which winked away quietly to itself. It nestled in the
darkness inside a leather satchel which Ford Prefect wore habitually round
his neck. The contents of Ford Prefect’s satchel were quite interesting in fact
and would have made any Earth physicist’s eyes pop out of his head, which
is why he always concealed them by keeping a couple of dog-eared scripts
for plays he pretended he was auditioning for stuffed in the top. Besides
the Sub-Etha Sens-O-Matic and the scripts he had an Electronic Thumb –
a short squat black rod, smooth and matt with a couple of flat switches
and dials at one end; he also had a device which looked rather like a largish
electronic calculator. This had about a hundred tiny flat press buttons and a
screen about four inches square on which any one of a million ”pages” could
be summoned at a moment’s notice. It looked insanely complicated, and this
was one of the reasons why the snug plastic cover it fitted into had the words
Don’t Panic printed on it in large friendly letters. The other reason was
that this device was in fact that most remarkable of all books ever to come
out of the great publishing corporations of Ursa Minor – The Hitchhiker’s
Guide to the Galaxy. The reason why it was published in the form of a micro
sub meson electronic component is that if it were printed in normal book
form, an interstellar hitchhiker would require several inconveniently large
buildings to carry it around in.
Beneath that in Ford Prefect’s satchel were a few biros, a notepad, and
a largish bath towel from Marks and Spencer.
The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy has a few things to say on the
subject of towels.
A towel, it says, is about the most massively useful thing an interstellar
hitchhiker can have.
Ford was very kind – he gave the barman another five-pound note and
told him to keep the change. The barman looked at it and then looked at
Ford. He suddenly shivered: he experienced a momentary sensation that he
didn’t understand because no one on Earth had ever experienced it before. In
moments of great stress, every life form that exists gives out a tiny sublimal
signal. This signal simply communicates an exact and almost pathetic sense
of how far that being is from the place of his birth. On Earth it is never
possible to be further than sixteen thousand miles from your birthplace,
which really isn’t very far, so such signals are too minute to be noticed. Ford
Prefect was at this moment under great stress, and he was born 600 light
years away in the near vicinity of Betelgeuse.
The barman reeled for a moment, hit by a shocking, incomprehensible
sense of distance. He didn’t know what it meant, but he looked at Ford
Prefect with a new sense of respect, almost awe.
The huge yellow machines began to sink downward and to move faster.
Ford knew they were there. This wasn’t the way he had wanted it.
Running up the lane, Arthur had nearly reached his house. He didn’t
notice how cold it had suddenly become, he didn’t notice the wind, he didn’t
notice the sudden irrational squall of rain. He didn’t notice anything but the
caterpillar bulldozers crawling over the rubble that had been his home.
”You barbarians!” he yelled. ”I’ll sue the council for every penny it’s got!
I’ll have you hung, drawn and quartered! And whipped! And boiled . . . until
. . . until . . . until you’ve had enough.”
Ford was running after him very fast. Very very fast.
”And then I’ll do it again!” yelled Arthur. ”And when I’ve finished I will
take all the little bits, and I will jump on them!”
Arthur didn’t notice that the men were running from the bulldozers; he
didn’t notice that Mr. Prosser was staring hectically into the sky. What
Mr. Prosser had noticed was that huge yellow somethings were screaming
through the clouds. Impossibly huge yellow somethings.
”And I will carry on jumping on them,” yelled Arthur, still running, ”until
I get blisters, or I can think of anything even more unpleasant to do, and
then . . . ”
Arthur tripped, and fell headlong, rolled and landed flat on his back. At
last he noticed that something was going on. His finger shot upwards.
”What the hell’s that?” he shrieked.
Whatever it was raced across the sky in monstrous yellowness, tore the
sky apart with mind-buggering noise and leapt off into the distance leaving
the gaping air to shut behind it with a bang that drove your ears six feet
into your skull.
Another one followed and did the same thing only louder.
It’s difficult to say exactly what the people on the surface of the planet
were doing now, because they didn’t really know what they were doing themselves.
None of it made a lot of sense running into houses, running out of
houses, howling noiselessly at the noise. All around the world city streets
exploded with people, cars slewed into each other as the noise fell on them
and then rolled off like a tidal wave over hills and valleys, deserts and oceans,
seeming to flatten everything it hit.
Only one man stood and watched the sky, stood with terrible sadness in
his eyes and rubber bungs in his ears. He knew exactly what was happening
and had known ever since his Sub-Etha Sens-OMatic had started winking in
the dead of night beside his pillar and woken him with a start. It was what
he had waited for all these years, but when he had deciphered the signal
pattern sitting alone in his small dark room a coldness had gripped him and
squeezed his heart. Of all the races in all of the Galaxy who could have come
and said a big hello to planet Earth, he thought, didn’t it just have to be the
Vogons.
Still he knew what he had to do. As the Vogon craft screamed through the
air high above him he opened his satchel. He threw away a copy of Joseph and
the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, he threw away a copy of Godspell: He
wouldn’t need them where he was going. Everything was ready, everything
was prepared.
He knew where his towel was.
A sudden silence hit the Earth. If anything it was worse than the noise.
For a while nothing happened.
The great ships hung motionless in the air, over every nation on Earth.
Motionless they hung, huge, heavy, steady in the sky, a blasphemy against
nature. Many people went straight into shock as their minds tried to encompass
what they were looking at. The ships hung in the sky in much the same
way that bricks don’t.
And still nothing happened.
Then there was a slight whisper, a sudden spacious whisper of open ambient
sound. Every hi fi set in the world, every radio, every television, every
cassette recorder, every woofer, every tweeter, every mid-range driver in the
world quietly turned itself on.
Every tin can, every dust bin, every window, every car, every wine glass,
every sheet of rusty metal became activated as an acoustically perfect sounding
board.
Before the Earth passed away it was going to be treated to the very
ultimate in sound reproduction, the greatest public address system ever built.
But there was no concert, no music, no fanfare, just a simple message.
Uncomprehending terror settled on the watching people of Earth. The
terror moved slowly through the gathered crowds as if they were iron fillings
on a sheet of board and a magnet was moving beneath them. Panic sprouted
again, desperate fleeing panic, but there was nowhere to flee to.
Observing this, the Vogons turned on their PA again. It said:
The PA fell silent again and its echo drifted off across the land. The huge
ships turned slowly in the sky with easy power. On the underside of each a
hatchway opened, an empty black space.
By this time somebody somewhere must have manned a radio transmitter,
located a wavelength and broadcasted a message back to the Vogon ships,
to plead on behalf of the planet. Nobody ever heard what they said, they
only heard the reply. The PA slammed back into life again. The voice was
annoyed. 
There was a terrible ghastly silence.
There was a terrible ghastly noise.
There was a terrible ghastly silence.
The Vogon Constructor fleet coasted away into the inky starry void.
Far away on the opposite spiral arm of the Galaxy, five hundred thousand
light years from the star Sol, Zaphod Beeblebrox, President of the Imperial
Galactic Government, sped across the seas of Damogran, his ion drive delta
boat winking and flashing in the Damogran sun.
Damogran the hot; Damogran the remote; Damogran the almost totally
unheard of.
Damogran, secret home of the Heart of Gold.
The boat sped on across the water. It would be some time before it
reached its destination because Damogran is such an inconveniently arranged
planet. It consists of nothing but middling to large desert islands separated
by very pretty but annoyingly wide stretches of ocean.
The boat sped on.
Because of this topological awkwardness Damogran has always remained
a deserted planet. This is why the Imperial Galactic Government chose
Damogran for the Heart of Gold project, because it was so deserted and the
Heart of Gold was so secret.
The boat zipped and skipped across the sea, the sea that lay between the
main islands of the only archipelago of any useful size on the whole planet.
Zaphod Beeblebrox was on his way from the tiny spaceport on Easter Island to the Heart of Gold island, which by
another meaningless coincidence was called France.
One of the side effects of work on the Heart of Gold was a whole string
of pretty meaningless coincidences.
But it was not in any way a coincidence that today, the day of culmination
of the project, the great day of unveiling, the day that the Heart of
Gold was finally to be introduced to a marvelling Galaxy, was also a great
day of culmination for Zaphod Beeblebrox. It was for the sake of this day
that he had first decided to run for the Presidency, a decision which had
sent waves of astonishment throughout the Imperial Galaxy – Zaphod Bee-
blebrox? President? Not the Zaphod Beeblebrox? Not the President? Many
had seen it as a clinching proof that the whole of known creation had finally
gone bananas.
Zaphod grinned and gave the boat an extra kick of speed.
Zaphod Beeblebrox, adventurer, ex-hippy, good timer, manic self-publicist, terribly bad at personal relationships, often
thought to be completely out to lunch.
President?
No one had gone bananas, not in that way at least.
Only six people in the entire Galaxy understood the principle on which
the Galaxy was governed, and they knew that once Zaphod Beeblebrox had
announced his intention to run as President it was more or less a fait accompli:
he was the ideal presidency fodder.1
What they completely failed to understand was why Zaphod was doing
it.
He banked sharply, shooting a wild wall of water at the sun.
Today was the day; today was the day when they would realize what
Zaphod had been up to. Today was what Zaphod Beeblebrox’s Presidency
was all about. Today was also his two hundredth birthday, but that was just
another meaningless coincidence.
As he skipped his boat across the seas of Damogran he smiled quietly to
himself about what a wonderful exciting day it was going to be. He relaxed
and spread his two arms lazily across the seat back. He steered with an
1President: full title President of the Imperial Galactic Government.
The term Imperial is kept though it is now an anachronism. The hereditary Emperor
is nearly dead and has been so for many centuries. In the last moments of his dying coma
he was locked in a statis field which keeps him in a state of perpetual unchangingness. All
his heirs are now long dead, and this means that without any drastic political upheaval,
power has simply and effectively moved a rung or two down the ladder, and is now seen
to be vested in a body which used to act simply as advisers to the Emperor – an elected
Governmental assembly headed by a President elected by that assembly. In fact it vests
in no such place.
The President in particular is very much a figurehead – he wields no real power whatsoever.
He is apparently chosen by the government, but the qualities he is required to
display are not those of leadership but those of finely judged outrage. For this reason the
President is always a controversial choice, always an infuriating but fascinating character.
His job is not to wield power but to draw attention away from it. On those criteria
Zaphod Beeblebrox is one of the most successful Presidents the Galaxy has ever had –
he has already spent two of his ten Presidential years in prison for fraud. Very very few
people realize that the President and the Government have virtually no power at all, and
of these very few people only six know whence ultimate political power is wielded. Most
of the others secretly believe that the ultimate decision-making process is handled by a
computer. They couldn’t be more wrong.
extra arm he’d recently fitted just beneath his right one to help improve his
ski-boxing.
It consisted in large part of the engineers and researchers who had built
the Heart of Gold – mostly humanoid, but here and there were a few reptiloid
atomineers, two or three green slyph-like maximegalacticans, an octopoid
physucturalist or two and a Hooloovoo (a Hooloovoo is a super-intelligent
shade of the color blue). All except the Hooloovoo were resplendent in their
multicolored ceremonial lab coats; the Hooloovoo had been temporarily refracted
into a free standing prism for the occasion.
There was a mood of immense excitement thrilling through all of them.
Together and between them they had gone to and beyond the furthest limits
of physical laws, restructured the fundamental fabric of matter, strained,
twisted and broken the laws of possibility and impossibility, but still the
greatest excitement of all seemed to be to meet a man with an orange sash
round his neck. (An orange sash was what the President of the Galaxy
traditionally wore.) It might not even have made much difference to them if
they’d known exactly how much power the President of the Galaxy actually
wielded: none at all. Only six people in the Galaxy knew that the job of
the Galactic President was not to wield power but to attract attention away
from it.
Zaphod Beeblebrox was amazingly good at his job.
The crowd gasped, dazzled by sun and seemanship, as the Presidential
speedboat zipped round the headland into the bay. It flashed and shone as
it came skating over the sea in wide skidding turns.
In fact it didn’t need to touch the water at all, because it was supported
on a hazy cushion of ionized atoms – but just for effect it was fitted with
thin finblades which could be lowered into the water. They slashed sheets
of water hissing into the air, carved deep gashes into the sea which swayed
crazily and sank back foaming into the boat’s wake as it careered across the
bay.
Zaphod loved effect: it was what he was best at.
He twisted the wheel sharply, the boat slewed round in a wild scything
skid beneath the cliff face and dropped to rest lightly on the rocking waves.
Within seconds he ran out onto the deck and waved and grinned at over
three billion people. The three billion people weren’t actually there, but they
watched his every gesture through the eyes of a small robot tri-D camera
which hovered obsequiously in the air nearby. The antics of the President
always made amazingly popular tri-D; that’s what they were for.
He grinned again. Three billion and six people didn’t know it, but today
would be a bigger antic than anyone had bargained for.
The robot camera homed in for a close up on the more popular of his two
heads and he waved again. He was roughly humanoid in appearance except
for the extra head and third arm. His fair tousled hair stuck out in random
directions, his blue eyes glinted with something completely unidentifiable,
and his chins were almost always unshaven.
A twenty-foot-high transparent globe floated next to his boat, rolling and
bobbing, glistening in the brilliant sun. Inside it floated a wide semi-circular
sofa upholstered in glorious red leather: the more the globe bobbed and
rolled, the more the sofa stayed perfectly still, steady as an upholstered rock.
Again, all done for effect as much as anything.
Zaphod stepped through the wall of the globe and relaxed on the sofa.
He spread his two arms lazily along the back and with the third brushed
some dust off his knee. His heads looked about, smiling; he put his feet up.
At any moment, he thought, he might scream.
Water boiled up beneath the bubble, it seethed and spouted. The bubble
surged into the air, bobbing and rolling on the water spout. Up, up it
climbed, throwing stilts of light at the cliff. Up it surged on the jet, the
water falling from beneath it, crashing back into the sea hundreds of feet
below.
Zaphod smiled, picturing himself.
A thoroughly ridiculous form of transport, but a thoroughly beautiful
one.
At the top of the cliff the globe wavered for a moment, tipped on to a
railed ramp, rolled down it to a small concave platform and riddled to a halt.
To tremendous applause Zaphod Beeblebrox stepped out of the bubble,
his orange sash blazing in the light.
The President of the Galaxy had arrived.
He waited for the applause to die down, then raised his hands in greeting.
A government spider sidled up to him and attempted to press a copy of his
prepared speech into his hands. Pages three to seven of the original version
were at the moment floating soggily on the Damogran sea some five miles out
from the bay. Pages one and two had been salvaged by a Damogran Frond
Crested Eagle and had already become incorporated into an extraordinary
new form of nest which the eagle had invented. It was constructed largely
of papier mˆach´e and it was virtually impossible for a newly hatched baby
eagle to break out of it. The Damogran Frond Crested Eagle had heard of
the notion of survival of the species but wanted no truck with it.
Zaphod Beeblebrox would not be needing his set speech and he gently
deflected the one being offered him by the spider.
Everyone beamed at him, or, at least, nearly everyone. He singled out
Trillian from the crowd. Trillian was a gird that Zaphod had picked up
recently whilst visiting a planet, just for fun, incognito. She was slim, darkish,
humanoid, with long waves of black hair, a full mouth, an odd little nob of
a nose and ridiculously brown eyes. With her red head scarf knotted in that
particular way and her long flowing silky brown dress she looked vaguely
Arabic. Not that anyone there had ever heard of an Arab of course. The
Arabs had very recently ceased to exist, and even when they had existed
they were five hundred thousand light years from Damogran. Trillian wasn’t
anybody in particular, or so Zaphod claimed. She just went around with him
rather a lot and told him what she thought of him.
She flashed him a quick tight smile and looked away. Then she looked
back for a moment and smiled more warmly – but by this time he was looking
at something else.
The next thing he said though was not a lot of use to them. One of the
officials of the party had irritably decided that the President was clearly not
in a mood to read the deliciously turned speech that had been written for
him, and had flipped the switch on the remote control device in his pocket.
Away in front of them a huge white dome that bulged against the sky cracked
down in the middle, split, and slowly folded itself down into the ground.
Everyone gasped although they had known perfectly well it was going to do
that because they had built it that way.
Beneath it lay uncovered a huge starship, one hundred and fifty metres
long, shaped like a sleek running shoe, perfectly white and mindboggingly
beautiful. At the heart of it, unseen, lay a small gold box which carried
within it the most brain-wretching device ever conceived, a device which
made this starship unique in the history of the galaxy, a device after which
the ship had been named – The Heart of Gold.
As he grinned his heart screamed unbearably and he fingered the small
Paralyso-Matic bomb that nestled quietly in his pocket.
Finally he could bear it no more. He lifted his heads up to the sky, let
out a wild whoop in major thirds, threw the bomb to the ground and ran
forward through the sea of suddenly frozen smiles.
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was not a pleasant sight, even for other Vogons. His
highly domed nose rose high above a small piggy forehead. His dark green
rubbery skin was thick enough for him to play the game of Vogon Civil
Service politics, and play it well, and waterproof enough for him to survive
indefinitely at sea depths of up to a thousand feet with no ill effects.
Not that he ever went swimming of course. His busy schedule would not
allow it. He was the way he was because billions of years ago when the
Vogons had first crawled out of the sluggish primeval seas of Vogsphere, and
had lain panting and heaving on the planet’s virgin shores. . . when the first
rays of the bright young Vogsol sun had shone across them that morning, it
was as if the forces of evolution ad simply given up on them there and then,
had turned aside in disgust and written them off as an ugly and unfortunate
mistake. They never evolved again; they should never have survived.
The fact that they did is some kind of tribute to the thickwilled slugbrained
stubbornness of these creatures. Evolution? they said to themselves,
Who needs it?, and what nature refused to do for them they simply did
without until such time as they were able to rectify the grosser anatomical
inconveniences with surgery.
Meanwhile, the natural forces on the planet Vogsphere had been working
overtime to make up for their earlier blunder. They brought forth scintillating
jewelled scuttling crabs, which the Vogons ate, smashing their shells with iron
mallets; tall aspiring trees with breathtaking slenderness and colour which
the Vogons cut down and burned the crab meat with; elegant gazellelike
creatures with silken coats and dewy eyes which the Vogons would catch
and sit on. They were no use as transport because their backs would snap
instantly, but the Vogons sat on them anyway.
Thus the planet Vogsphere whiled away the unhappy millennia until the
Vogons suddenly discovered the principles of interstellar travel. Within a few
short Vog years every last Vogon had migrated to the Megabrantis cluster, the
political hub of the Galaxy and now formed the immensely powerful backbone
of the Galactic Civil Service. They have attempted to acquire learning, they
have attempted to acquire style and social grace, but in most respects the
modern Vogon is little different from his primitive forebears. Every year they
import twenty-seven thousand scintillating jewelled scuttling crabs from their
native planet and while away a happy drunken night smashing them to bits
with iron mallets.
Prostetnic Vogon Jeltz was a fairly typical Vogon in that he was thoroughly
vile. Also, he did not like hitchhikers.
Somewhere in a small dark cabin buried deep in the intestines of Prostetnic
Vogon Jeltz’s flagship, a small match flared nervously. The owner of the
match was not a Vogon, but he knew all about them and was right to be
nervous. His name was Ford Prefect.1
He looked about the cabin but could see very little; strange monstrous
shadows loomed and leaped with the tiny flickering flame, but all was quiet.
He breathed a silent thank you to the Dentrassis. The Dentrassis are an
unruly tribe of gourmands, a wild but pleasant bunch whom the Vogons had
recently taken to employing as catering staff on their long haul fleets, on the
strict understanding that they keep themselves very much to themselves.
This suited the Dentrassis fine, because they loved Vogon money, which
is one of the hardest currencies in space, but loathed the Vogons themselves.
The only sort of Vogon a Dentrassi liked to see was an annoyed Vogon.
It was because of this tiny piece of information that Ford Prefect was not
now a whiff of hydrogen, ozone and carbon monoxide.
He heard a slight groan. By the light of the match he saw a heavy shape
moving slightly on the floor. Quickly he shook the match out, reached in his
1Ford Prefect’s original name is only pronuncible in an obscure Betelgeusian dialect,
now virtually extinct since the Great Collapsing Hrung Disaster of Gal./Sid./Year 03758
which wiped out all the old Praxibetel communities on Betelgeuse Seven. Ford’s father
was the only man on the entire planet to survive the Great Collapsing Hrung disaster, by
an extraordinary coincidence that he was never able satisfactorily to explain. The whole
episode is shrouded in deep mystery: in fact no one ever knew what a Hrung was nor why
it had chosen to collapse on Betelgeuse Seven particularly. Ford’s father, magnanimously
waving aside the clouds of suspicion that had inevitably settled around him, came to live
on Betelgeuse Five where he both fathered and uncled Ford; in memory of his now dead
race he christened him in the ancient Praxibetel tongue.
One of the things Ford Prefect had always found hardest to understand
about human beings was their habit of continually stating and repeating the
obvious, as in It’s a nice day, or You’re very tall, or Oh dear you seem to
have fallen down a thirty-foot well, are you alright? At first Ford had formed
a theory to account for this strange behaviour. If human beings don’t keep
exercising their lips, he thought, their mouths probably seize up. After a few
months’ consideration and observation he abandoned this theory in favour
of a new one. If they don’t keep on exercising their lips, he thought, their
brains start working. After a while he abandoned this one as well as being
obstructively cynical and decided he quite liked human beings after all, but
he always remained desperately worried about the terrible number of things
they didn’t know about.
Ford struck another match to help him search for a light switch. Monstrous
shadows leaped and loomed again. Arthur struggled to his feet and
hugged himself apprehensively. Hideous alien shapes seemed to throng about
him, the air was thick with musty smells which sidled into his lungs without
identifying themselves, and a low irritating hum kept his brain from focusing.
The room folded flat about him, spun around, shifted out of existence
and left him sliding into his own navel.
They were passing through hyperspace.
The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy is a wholly remarkable book. It has
been compiled and recompiled many times over many years and under many
different editorships. It contains contributions from countless numbers of
travellers and researchers.
The introduction begins like this:
”Space,” it says, ”is big. Really big. You just won’t believe how vastly
hugely mindboggingly big it is. I mean you may think it’s a long way down
the road to the chemist, but that’s just peanuts to space. Listen . . . ” and so
on.
To be fair though, when confronted by the sheer enormity of distances
between the stars, better minds than the one responsible for the Guide’s introduction
have faltered. Some invite you to consider for a moment a peanut
in reading and a small walnut in Johannesburg, and other such dizzying concepts.
The simple truth is that interstellar distances will not fit into the human
imagination.
Even light, which travels so fast that it takes most races thousands of
years to realize that it travels at all, takes time to journey between the stars.
It takes eight minutes from the star Sol to the place where the Earth used to
be, and four years more to arrive at Sol’s nearest stellar neighbour, Alpha
Proxima.
For light to reach the other side of the Galaxy, for it to reach Damogran
for instance, takes rather longer: five hundred thousand years.
The record for hitch hiking this distance is just under five years, but you
don’t get to see much on the way.
The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy says that if you hold a lungful of
air you can survive in the total vacuum of space for about thirty seconds.
However it goes on to say that what with space being the mind boggling size it
is the chances of getting picked up by another ship within those thirty seconds
are two to the power of two hundred and sixty-seven thousand seven hundred
and nine to one against.
By a totally staggering coincidence that is also the telephone number of
an Islington flat where Arthur once went to a very good party and met a
very nice girl whom he totally failed to get off with – she went off with a
gatecrasher.
Though the planet Earth, the Islington flat and the telephone have all
now been demolished, it is comforting to reflect that they are all in some
small way commemorated by the fact that twenty-nine seconds later Ford and
Arthur were rescued.
A computer chatted to itself in alarm as it noticed an airlock open and close
itself for no apparent reason.
This was because Reason was in fact out to lunch. A hole had just
appeared in the Galaxy. It was exactly a nothingth of a second long, a
nothingth of an inch wide, and quite a lot of million light years from end to
end.
As it closed up lots of paper hats and party balloons fell out of it and
drifted off through the universe. A team of seven threefoot-high market
analysts fell out of it and died, partly of asphyxication, partly of surprise.
Two hundred and thirty-nine thousand lightly fried eggs fell out of it too,
materializing in a large woobly heap on the faminestruck land of Poghril in
the Pansel system.
The whole Poghril tribe had died out from famine except for one last man
who died of cholesterol poisoning some weeks later.
The nothingth of a second for which the hole existed reverberated backwards
and forwards through time in a most improbable fashion. Somewhere
in the deeply remote past it seriously traumatized a small random group of
atoms drifting through the empty sterility of space and made them cling together
in the most extraordinarily unlikely patterns. These patterns quickly
learnt to copy themselves (this was part of what was so extraordinary of the
patterns) and went on to cause massive trouble on every planet they drifted
on to. That was how life began in the Universe.
Five wild Event Maelstroms swirled in vicious storms of unreason and
spewed up a pavement.
On the pavement lay Ford Prefect and Arthur Dent gulping like half-spent
fish.
Many respectable physicists said that they weren’t going to stand for this
– partly because it was a debasement of science, but mostly because they
didn’t get invited to those sort of parties.
Another thing they couldn’t stand was the perpetual failure they encountered
in trying to construct a machine which could generate the infinite
improbability field needed to flip a spaceship across the mind-paralysing distances
between the furthest stars, and in the end they grumpily announced
that such a machine was virtually impossible.
Then, one day, a student who had been left to sweep up the lab after a
particularly unsuccessful party found himself reasoning this way:
If, he thought to himself, such a machine is a virtual impossibility, then
it must logically be a finite improbability. So all I have to do in order to
make one is to work out exactly how improbable it is, feed that figure into
the finite improbability generator, give it a fresh cup of really hot tea . . . and
turn it on!
He did this, and was rather startled to discover that he had managed to
create the long sought after golden Infinite Improbability generator out of
thin air.
It startled him even more when just after he was awarded the Galactic
Institute’s Prize for Extreme Cleverness he got lynched by a rampaging mob
of respectable physicists who had finally realized that the one thing they
really couldn’t stand was a smartass.
The Improbability-proof control cabin of the Heart of Gold looked like a
perfectly conventional spaceship except that it was perfectly clean because
it was so new. Some of the control seats hadn’t had the plastic wrapping
taken off yet. The cabin was mostly white, oblong, and about the size of a
smallish restaurant. In fact it wasn’t perfectly oblong: the two long walls
were raked round in a slight parallel curve, and all the angles and corners
were contoured in excitingly chunky shapes. The truth of the matter is that
it would have been a great deal simpler and more practical to build the cabin
as an ordinary three-dimensional oblong rom, but then the designers would
have got miserable. As it was the cabin looked excitingly purposeful, with
large video screens ranged over the control and guidance system panels on
the concave wall, and long banks of computers set into the convex wall. In
one corner a robot sat humped, its gleaming brushed steel head hanging
loosely between its gleaming brushed steel knees. It too was fairly new, but
though it was beautifully constructed and polished it somehow looked as if
the various parts of its more or less humanoid body didn’t quite fit properly.
In fact they fitted perfectly well, but something in its bearing suggested that
they might have fitted better.
Zaphod Beeblebrox paced nervously up and down the cabin, brushing his
hands over pieces of gleaming equipment and giggling with excitement.
Trillian sat hunched over a clump of instruments reading off figures. Her
voice was carried round the Tannoy system of the whole ship.
The others followed quickly and the door slit back into place with pleased
little clicks and whirrs.
He stepped through into the bridge.
Arthur followed him in nervously and was astonished to see a man lolling
back in a chair with his feet on a control console picking the teeth in his righthand
head with his left hand. The right-hand head seemed to be thoroughly
preoccupied with this task, but the left-hand one was grinning a broad, relaxed,
nonchalant grin. The number of things that Arthur couldn’t believe
he was seeing was fairly large. His jaw flapped about at a loose end for a
while.
The Heart of Gold fled on silently through the night of space, now on conventional
photon drive. Its crew of four were ill at ease knowing that they
had been brought together not of their own volition or by simple coincidence,
but by some curious principle of physics – as if relationships between people
were susceptible to the same laws that governed the relationships between
atoms and molecules.
As the ship’s artificial night closed in they were each grateful to retire to
separate cabins and try to rationalize their thoughts.
Trillian couldn’t sleep. She sat on a couch and stared at a small cage which
contained her last and only links with Earth – two white mice that she had
insisted Zaphod let her bring. She had expected not to see the planet again,
but she was disturbed by her negative reaction to the planet’s destruction. It
seemed remote and unreal and she could find no thoughts to think about it.
She watched the mice scurrying round the cage and running furiously in their
little plastic treadwheels till they occupied her whole attention. Suddenly
she shook herself and went back to the bridge to watch over the tiny flashing
lights and figures that charted the ship’s progress through the void. She
wished she knew what it was she was trying not to think about.
Zaphod couldn’t sleep. He also wished he knew what it was that he
wouldn’t let himself think about. For as long as he could remember he’d
suffered from a vague nagging feeling of being not all there. Most of the time
he was able to put this thought aside and not worry about it, but it had been
re-awakened by the sudden inexplicable arrival of Ford Prefect and Arthur
Dent. Somehow it seemed to conform to a pattern that he couldn’t see.
Ford couldn’t sleep. He was too excited about being back on the road
again. Fifteen years of virtual imprisonment were over, just as he was finally
beginning to give up hope. Knocking about with Zaphod for a bit promised
to be a lot of fun, though there seemed to be something faintly odd about his
semi-cousin that he couldn’t put his finger on. The fact that he had become
President of the Galaxy was frankly astonishing, as was the manner of his
leaving the post. Was there a reason behind it? There would be no point in
asking Zaphod, he never appeared to have a reason for anything he did at
all: he had turned unfathomably into an art form. He attacked everything
in life with a mixture of extraordinary genius and naive incompetence and it
was often difficult to tell which was which.
Arthur slept: he was terribly tired.
There was a tap at Zaphod’s door. It slid open.
For a moment it seemed that nothing was happening, then a brightness
glowed at the edge of the huge screen. A red star the size of a small plate
crept across it followed quickly by another one – a binary system. Then a
vast crescent sliced into the corner of the picture – a red glare shading away
into the deep black, the night side of the planet.
Far back in the mists of ancient time, in the great and glorious days of
the former Galactic Empire, life was wild, rich and largely tax free. Mighty
starships plied their way between exotic suns, seeking adventure and reward
amongst the furthest reaches of Galactic space. In those days spirits were
brave, the stakes were high, men were real men, women were real women,
and small furry creatures from Alpha Centauri were real small furry creatures
from Alpha Centauri. And all dared to brave unknown terrors, to do mighty
deeds, to boldly split infinitives that no man had split before – and thus was
the Empire forged.
Many men of course became extremely rich, but this was perfectly natural
and nothing to be ashamed of because no one was really poor – at least no
one worth speaking of. And for all the richest and most successful merchants
life inevitably became rather dull and niggly, and they began to imagine that
this was therefore the fault of the worlds they’d settled on – none of them was
entirely satisfactory: either the climate wasn’t quite right in the later part of
the afternoon, or the day was half an hour too long, or the sea was exactly
the wrong shade of pink.
And thus were created the conditions for a staggering new form of specialist
industry: custom-made luxury planet building. The home of this industry
was the planet Magrathea, where hyperspatial engineers sucked matter through
white holes in space to form it into dream planets – gold planets, platinum
planets, soft rubber planets with lots of earthquakes – all lovingly made to
meet the exacting standards that the Galaxy’s richest men naturally came to
expect.
But so successful was this venture that Magrathea itself soon became the
richest planet of all time and the rest of the Galaxy was reduced to abject
poverty. And so the system broke down, the Empire collapsed, and a long
sullen silence settled over a billion worlds, disturbed only by the pen scratchings
of scholars as they laboured into the night over smug little treaties on
the value of a planned political economy.
Magrathea itself disappeared and its memory soon passed into the obscurity
of legend.
In these enlightened days of course, no one believes a word of it.
Arthur awoke to the sound of argument and went to the bridge. Ford was
waving his arms about.
Ford leapt to the controls – only a few of them made any immediate sense
to him so he pulled those. The ship shook and screamed as its guidance
rocked jets tried to push it every which way simultaneously. He released half
of them and the ship span round in a tight arc and headed back the way it
had come, straight towards the oncoming missiles.
Air cushions ballooned out of the walls in an instant as everyone was
thrown against them. For a few seconds the inertial forces held them flattened
and squirming for breath, unable to move. Zaphod struggled and pushed in
manic desperation and finally managed a savage kick at a small lever that
formed part of the guidance system.
The lever snapped off. The ship twisted sharply and rocketed upwards.
The crew were hurled violently back across the cabin. Ford’s copy of The
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy smashed into another section of the control
console with the combined result that the Guide started to explain to anyone
who cared to listen about the best ways of smuggling Antarean parakeet
glands out of Antares (an Antarean parakeet gland stuck on a small stick is
a revolting but much sought after cocktail delicacy and very large sums of
money are often paid for them by very rich idiots who want to impress other
very rich idiots), and the ship suddenly dropped out of the sky like a stone.
It was of course more or less at this moment that one of the crew sustained
a nasty bruise to the upper arm. This should be emphasized because, as had
already been revealed, they escape otherwise completely unharmed and the
deadly nuclear missiles do not eventually hit the ship. The safety of the crew
is absolutely assured.
Another thing that got forgotten was the fact that against all probability
a sperm whale had suddenly been called into existence several miles above
the surface of an alien planet.
And since this is not a naturally tenable position for a whale, this poor
innocent creature had very little time to come to terms with its identity as a
whale before it then had to come to terms with not being a whale any more.
This is a complete record of its thoughts from the moment it began its
life till the moment it ended it.
Ah . . . ! What’s happening? it thought.
Er, excuse me, who am I?
Hello?
Why am I here? What’s my purpose in life?
What do I mean by who am I?
Calm down, get a grip now . . . oh! this is an interesting sensation, what is
it? It’s a sort of . . . yawning, tingling sensation in my . . . my . . . well I suppose
I’d better start finding names for things if I want to make any headway in
what for the sake of what I shall call an argument I shall call the world, so
let’s call it my stomach.
Good. Ooooh, it’s getting quite strong. And hey, what’s about this
whistling roaring sound going past what I’m suddenly going to call my head?
Perhaps I can call that . . . wind! Is that a good name? It’ll do . . . perhaps I
can find a better name for it later when I’ve found out what it’s for. It must
be something very important because there certainly seems to be a hell of a
lot of it. Hey! What’s this thing? This . . . let’s call it a tail – yeah, tail. Hey!
I can can really thrash it about pretty good can’t I? Wow! Wow! That feels
great! Doesn’t seem to achieve very much but I’ll probably find out what it’s
for later on. Now – have I built up any coherent picture of things yet?
No.
Never mind, hey, this is really exciting, so much to find out about, so
much to look forward to, I’m quite dizzy with anticipation . . .
Or is it the wind?
There really is a lot of that now isn’t it?
And wow! Hey! What’s this thing suddenly coming towards me very
fast? Very very fast. So big and flat and round, it needs a big wide sounding
name like . . . ow . . . ound . . . round . . . ground! That’s it! That’s a good name
– ground!
I wonder if it will be friends with me?
And the rest, after a sudden wet thud, was silence.
Curiously enough, the only thing that went through the mind of the bowl
of petunias as it fell was Oh no, not again. Many people have speculated
that if we knew exactly why the bowl of petunias had thought that we would
know a lot more about the nature of the universe than we do now.
The voice was oddly familiar, but oddly different. It had a matriarchal
twang. It announced itself to the crew as they arrived at the airlock hatchway
that would let them out on the planet surface.
They looked at each other in puzzlement.
A few minutes later he opened and closed the hatchway again in response
to a command that caught him entirely by surprise.
Five figures wandered slowly over the blighted land. Bits of it were dullish
grey, bits of it dullish brown, the rest of it rather less interesting to look at.
It was like a dried-out marsh, now barren of all vegetation and covered with
a layer of dust about an inch thick. It was very cold.
Zaphod was clearly rather depressed about it. He stalked off by himself
and was soon lost to sight behind a slight rise in the ground.
The wind stung Arthur’s eyes and ears, and the stale thin air clasped his
throat. However, the thing stung most was his mind.
Trillian hugged herself, shivered and frowned. She could have sworn she
saw a slight and unexpected movement out of the corner of her eye, but when
she glanced in that direction all she could see was the ship, still and silent, a
hundred yards or so behind them.
She was relieved when a second or so later they caught sight of Zaphod
standing on top of the ridge of ground and waving to them to come and join
him.
He seemed to be excited, but they couldn’t clearly hear what he was
saying because of the thinnish atmosphere and the wind.
As they approached the ridge of higher ground they became aware that
it seemed to be circular – a crater about a hundred and fifty yards wide.
Round the outside of the crater the sloping ground was spattered with black
and red lumps. They stopped and looked at a piece. It was wet. It was
rubbery.
With horror they suddenly realized that it was fresh whalemeat.
At the top of the crater’s lip they met Zaphod.
Marvin started his ironical humming again.
Zaphod hit him and he shut up.
With little shudders of disgust they all followed Zaphod down the incline
into the crater, trying very hard not to look at its unfortunate creator.
Zaphod paused for a while. For a while there was silence. Then he
frowned and said, ”Last night I was worrying about this again. About the
fact that part of my mind just didn’t seem to work properly. Then it occurred
to me that the way it seemed was that someone else was using my mind to
have good ideas with, without telling me about it. I put the two ideas
together and decided that maybe that somebody had locked off part of my
mind for that purpose, which was why I couldn’t use it. I wondered if there
was a way I could check.
”I went to the ship’s medical bay and plugged myself into the encephelographic
screen. I went through every major screening test on both my heads
– all the tests I had to go through under government medical officers before
my nomination for Presidency could be properly ratified. They showed up
nothing. Nothing unexpected at least. They showed that I was clever, imaginative,
irresponsible, untrustworthy, extrovert, nothing you couldn’t have
guessed. And no other anomalies. So I started inventing further tests, completely
at random. Nothing. Then I tried superimposing the results from one
head on top of the results from the other head. Still nothing. Finally I got
silly, because I’d given it all up as nothing more than an attack of paranoia.
Last thing I did before I packed it in was take the superimposed picture and
look at it through a green filter. You remember I was always superstitious
about the color green when I was a kid? I always wanted to be a pilot on
one of the trading scouts?”
Ford nodded.
One of these supposedly relates the
experiences of one Veet Voojagig, a quiet young student at the University
of Maximegalon, who pursued a brilliant academic career studying ancient
philology, transformational ethics and the wave harmonic theory of historical
perception, and then, after a night of drinking Pan Galactic Gargle Blasters
with Zaphod Beeblebrox, became increasingly obsessed with the problem of
what had happened to all the biros he’d bought over the past few years.
There followed a long period of painstaking research during which he visited
all the major centres of biro loss throughout the galaxy and eventually
came up with a quaint little theory which quite caught the public imagination
at the time. Somewhere in the cosmos, he said, along with all the planets
inhabited by humanoids, reptiloids, fishoids, walking treeoids and superintelligent
shades of the colour blue, there was also a planet entirely given over to
biro life forms. And it was to this planet that unattended biros would make
their way, slipping away quietly through wormholes in space to a world where
they knew they could enjoy a uniquely biroid lifestyle, responding to highly
biro-oriented stimuli, and generally leading the biro equivalent of the good
life.
And as theories go this was all very fine and pleasant until Veet Voojagig
suddenly claimed to have found this planet, and to have worked there for a
while driving a limousine for a family of cheap green retractables, whereupon
he was taken away, locked up, wrote a book, and was finally sent into tax
exile, which is the usual fate reserved for those who are determined to make
a fool of themselves in public.
When one day an expedition was sent to the spatial coordinates that Voojagig
had claimed for this planet they discovered only a small asteroid inhabited
by a solitary old man who claimed repeatedly that nothing was true,
though he was later discovered to be lying.
There did, however, remain the question of both the mysterious 60,000
Altairan dollars paid yearly into his Brantisvogan bank account, and of course
Zaphod Beeblebrox’s highly profitable second-hand biro business.
Arthur read this, and put the book down.
The robot still sat there, completely inert.
Arthur got up and walked to the top of the crater. He walked around the
crater. He watched two suns set magnificently over Magrathea.
He went back down into the crater. He woke the robot up because even
a manically depressed robot is better to talk to than nobody.
Because the atmosphere was so thin and because there was no moon,
nightfall was very rapid and it was by now very dark. Because of this,
Arthur practically walked into the old man before he noticed him.
He was standing with his back to Arthur watching the very last glimmers
of light sink into blackness behind the horizon. He was tallish, elderly and
dressed in a single long grey robe. When he turned his face was thin and
distinguished, careworn but not unkind, the sort of face you would happily
bank with. But he didn’t turn yet, not even to react to Arthur’s yelp of
surprise.
Eventually the last rays of the sun had vanished completely, and he
turned. His face was still illuminated from somewhere, and when Arthur
looked for the source of the light he saw that a few yards away stood a small
craft of some kind – a small hovercraft, Arthur guessed. It shed a dim pool
of light around it.
The man looked at Arthur, sadly it seemed.
The aircar sailed through the night.
It is an important and popular fact that things are not always what they
seem. For instance, on the planet Earth, man had always assumed that
he was more intelligent than dolphins because he had achieved so much –
the wheel, New York, wars and so on – whilst all the dolphins had ever
done was muck about in the water having a good time. But conversely, the
dolphins had always believed that they were far more intelligent than man –
for precisely the same reasons.
Curiously enough, the dolphins had long known of the impending destruction
of the planet Earth and had made many attempts to alert mankind of
the danger; but most of their communications were misinterpreted as amusing
attempts to punch footballs or whistle for tidbits, so they eventually gave
up and left the Earth by their own means shortly before the Vogons arrived.
The last ever dolphin message was misinterpreted as a surprisingly sophisticated
attempt to do a double-backwardssomersault through a hoop whilst
whistling the ”Star Sprangled Banner”, but in fact the message was this: So
long and thanks for all the fish.
In fact there was only one species on the planet more intelligent than
dolphins, and they spent a lot of their time in behavioural research laboratories
running round inside wheels and conducting frighteningly elegant
and subtle experiments on man. The fact that once again man completely
misinterpreted this relationship was entirely according to these creatures’
plans.
Silently the aircar coasted through the cold darkness, a single soft glow of
light that was utterly alone in the deep Magrathean night. It sped swiftly.
Arthur’s companion seemed sunk in his own thoughts, and when Arthur tried
on a couple of occasions to engage him in conversation again he would simply
reply by asking if he was comfortable enough, and then left it at that.
Arthur tried to gauge the speed at which they were travelling, but the
blackness outside was absolute and he was denied any reference points. The
sense of motion was so soft and slight he could almost believe they were
hardly moving at all.
Then a tiny glow of light appeared in the far distance and within seconds
had grown so much in size that Arthur realized it was travelling towards them
at a colossal speed, and he tried to make out what sort of craft it might be.
He peered at it, but was unable to discern any clear shape, and suddenly
gasped in alarm as the aircraft dipped sharply and headed downwards in
what seemed certain to be a collision course. Their relative velocity seemed
unbelievable, and Arthur had hardly time to draw breath before it was all
over. The next thing he was aware of was an insane silver blur that seemed
to surround him. He twisted his head sharply round and saw a small black
point dwindling rapidly in the distance behind them, and it took him several
seconds to realize what had happened.
They had plunged into a tunnel in the ground. The colossal speed had
been their own relative to the glow of light which was a stationary hole in the
ground, the mouth of the tunnel. The insane blur of silver was the circular
wall of the tunnel down which they were shooting, apparently at several
hundred miles an hour.
He closed his eyes in terror.
After a length of time which he made no attempt to judge, he sensed a
slight subsidence in their speed and some while later became aware that they
were gradually gliding to a gentle halt.
He opened his eyes again. They were still in the silver tunnel, threading
and weaving their way through what appeared to be a crisscross warren of
converging tunnels. When they finally stopped it was in a small chamber of
curved steel. Several tunnels also had their terminus here, and at the farther
end of the chamber Arthur could see a large circle of dim irritating light.
It was irritating because it played tricks with the eyes, it was impossible to
focus on it properly or tell how near or far it was. Arthur guessed (quite
wrongly) that it might be ultra violet.
Slartibartfast turned and regarded Arthur with his solemn old eyes.
The car shot forward straight into the circle of light, and suddenly Arthur
had a fairly clear idea of what infinity looked like.
It wasn’t infinity in fact. Infinity itself looks flat and uninteresting. Looking
up into the night sky is looking into infinity – distance is incomprehensible
and therefore meaningless. The chamber into which the aircar emerged was
anything but infinite, it was just very very big, so that it gave the impression
of infinity far better than infinity itself.
Arthur’s senses bobbed and span, as, travelling at the immense speed
he knew the aircar attained, they climbed slowly through the open air leaving
the gateway through which they had passed an invisible pinprick in the
shimmering wall behind them.
The wall.
The wall defied the imagination – seduced it and defeated it. The wall
was so paralysingly vast and sheer that its top, bottom and sides passed away
beyond the reach of sight. The mere shock of vertigo could kill a man.
The wall appeared perfectly flat. It would take the finest laser measuring
equipment to detect that as it climbed, apparently to infinity, as it dropped
dizzily away, as it planed out to either side, it also curved. It met itself again
thirteen light seconds away. In other words the wall formed the inside of
a hollow sphere, a sphere over three million miles across and flooded with
unimaginable light.
Arthur followed the old man’s finger, till he was able to pick out the
floating structure he was pointing out. It was indeed the only one of the
many structures that betrayed any sign of activity about it, though this was
more a sublimal impression than anything one could put one’s finger on.
At the moment however a flash of light arced through the structure and
revealed in stark relief the patterns that were formed on the dark sphere
within. Patterns that Arthur knew, rough blobby shapes that were as familiar
to him as the shapes of words, part of the furniture of his mind. For a few
seconds he sat in stunned silence as the images rushed around his mind and
tried to find somewhere to settle down and make sense.
Part of his brain told him that he knew perfectly well what he was looking
at and what the shapes represented whilst another quite sensibly refused to
countenance the idea and abdicated responsibility for any further thinking
in that direction.
The flash came again, and this time there could be no doubt.
The old man paused, and with a sympathetic frown continued. ”They’ve
been experimenting on you I’m afraid.”
Arthur thought about this for a second, and then his face cleared.
So what happened was hat the mice would be set all sorts of tests,
learning to ring bells, run around mazes and things so that the whole nature
of the learning process could be examined. From our observations of their
behaviour we were able to learn all sorts of things about our own . . . ”
Arthur’s voice tailed off.
It was the size of a small city.
Its main console was installed in a specially designed executive office,
mounted on an enormous executive desk of finest ultramahagony topped
with rich ultrared leather. The dark carpeting was discreetly sumptuous,
exotic pot plants and tastefully engraved prints of the principal computer
programmers and their families were deployed liberally about the room, and
stately windows looked out upon a tree-lined public square.
On the day of the Great On-Turning two soberly dressed programmers
with brief cases arrived and were shown discreetly into the office. They were
aware that this day they would represent their entire race in its greatest
moment, but they conducted themselves calmly and quietly as they seated
themselves deferentially before the desk, opened their brief cases and took
out their leather-bound notebooks.
Their names were Lunkwill and Fook.
For a few moments they sat in respectful silence, then, after exchanging
a quiet glance with Fook, Lunkwill leaned forward and touched a small black
panel.
The subtlest of hums indicated that the massive computer was now in
total active mode. After a pause it spoke to them in a voice rich resonant
and deep.
A sudden commotion destroyed the moment: the door flew open and two
angry men wearing the coarse faded-blue robes and belts of the Cruxwan
University burst into the room, thrusting aside the ineffectual flunkies who
tried to bar their way.
The instant he took hold of them a bird flew straight through him.
He was suspended in mid-air and totally invisible to himself. Beneath him
was a pretty treelined city square, and all around it as far as the eye could see
were white concrete buildings of airy spacious design but somewhat the worse
for wear – many were cracked and stained with rain. Today however the sun
was shining, a fresh breeze danced lightly through the trees, and the odd
sensation that all the buildings were quietly humming was probably caused
by the fact that the square and all the streets around it were thronged with
cheerful excited people. Somewhere a band was playing, brightly coloured
flags were fluttering in the breeze and the spirit of carnival was in the air.
Arthur felt extraordinarily lonely stuck up in the air above it all without
so much as a body to his name, but before he had time to reflect on this a
voice rang out across the square and called for everyone’s attention.
A man standing on a brightly dressed dais before the building which
clearly dominated the square was addressing the crowd over a Tannoy.
As the crowd erupted once again, Arthur found himself gliding through
the air and down towards one of the large stately windows on the first floor
of the building behind the dais from which the speaker was addressing the
crowd.
He experienced a moment’s panic as he sailed straight through towards
the window, which passed when a second or so later he found he had gone
right through the solid glass without apparently touching it.
No one in the room remarked on his peculiar arrival, which is hardly
surprising as he wasn’t there. He began to realize that the whole experience
was merely a recorded projection which knocked six-track seventy-millimetre
into a cocked hat.
The room was much as Slartibartfast had described it. In seven and a
half million years it had been well looked after and cleaned regularly every
century or so. The ultramahagony desk was worn at the edges, the carpet a
little faded now, but the large computer terminal sat in sparkling glory on
the desk’s leather top, as bright as if it had been constructed yesterday.
Two severely dressed men sat respectfully before the terminal and waited.
The scene around them was currently plunged into gloom. Dark mists
swirled round them and elephantine shapes lurked indistinctly in the shadows.
The air was occasionally rent with the sounds of illusory beings murdering
other illusory beings. Presumably enough people must have liked this
sort of thing to make it a paying proposition.
The two opposing leaders were meeting for the last time.
A dreadful silence fell across the conference table as the commander of the
Vl’hurgs, resplendent in his black jewelled battle shorts, gazed levelly at the
G’Gugvuntt leader squatting opposite him in a cloud of green sweet-smelling
steam, and, with a million sleek and horribly beweaponed star cruisers poised
to unleash electric death at his single word of command, challenged the vile
creature to take back what it had said about his mother.
The creature stirred in his sickly broiling vapour, and at that very moment
the words I seem to be having tremendous difficulty with my lifestyle drifted
across the conference table.
Unfortunately, in the Vl’hurg tongue this was the most dreadful insult
imaginable, and there was nothing for it but to wage terrible war for centuries.
Eventually of course, after their Galaxy had been decimated over a few
thousand years, it was realized that the whole thing had been a ghastly
mistake, and so the two opposing battle fleets settled their few remaining
differences in order to launch a joint attack on our own Galaxy – now positively
identified as the source of the offending remark.
For thousands more years the mighty ships tore across the empty wastes
of space and finally dived screaming on to the first planet they came across
– which happened to be the Earth – where due to a terrible miscalculation
of scale the entire battle fleet was accidentally swallowed by a small dog.
Those who study the complex interplay of cause and effect in the history
of the Universe say that this sort of thing is going on all the time, but that
we are powerless to prevent it.
A short aircar trip brought Arthur and the old Magrathean to a doorway.
They left the car and went through the door into a waiting room full of
glass-topped tables and perspex awards. Almost immediately, a light flashed
above the door at the other side of the room and they entered.
There was an awkward silence as everyone looked pointedly at Arthur.
He was busy staring at two white mice sitting in what looked like whisky
glasses on the table. He heard the silence and glanced around at everyone.
With one more yank, Ford and Zaphod got the door open. On the other
side of it was a small pack of rather ugly men who they could only assume
were the heavy mob of Magrathea. Not only were they ugly themselves, but
the medical equipment they carried with them was also far from pretty. They
charged.
So – Arthur was about to have his head cut open, Trillian was unable to
help him, and Ford and Zaphod were about to be set upon by several thugs
a great deal heavier and more sharply armed than they were.
All in all it was extremely fortunate that at that moment every alarm on
the planet burst into an earsplitting din.
He rolled the phrase around a little. 
Another pause, and then the bullhorn again.
For a moment, nothing happened.
Then, after a second or so, nothing continued to happen. Ford peered
through the thick smoke that was billowing out of the burning computer.
Cautiously he stepped out into the open.
Still nothing happened.
Twenty yards away he could dimly see through the smoke the space-suited
figure of one of the cops. He was lying in a crumpled heap on the ground.
Twenty yards in the other direction lay the second man. No one else was
anywhere to be seen.
This struck Ford as being extremely odd.
Slowly, nervously, he walked towards the first one. The body lay reassuringly
still as he approached it, and continued to lie reassuringly still as he
reached it and put his foot down on the Kill-O-Zap gun that still dangled
from its limp fingers.
He reached down and picked it up, meeting no resistance.
The cop was quite clearly dead.
A quick examination revealed him to be from Blagulon Kappa – he was a
methane-breathing life form, dependent on his space suit for survival in the
thin oxygen atmosphere of Magrathea.
The tiny life-support system computer on his backpack appeared unexpectedly
to have blown up.
Ford poked around in it in considerable astonishment. These miniature
suit computers usually had the full back-up of the main computer back on the
ship, with which they were directly linked through the sub-etha. Such a system
was fail-safe in all circumstances other than total feedback malfunction,
which was unheard of.
He hurried over to the other prone figure, and discovered that exactly the
same impossible thing had happened to him, presumably simultaneously.
He called the others over to look. They came, shared his astonishment,
but not his curiosity. He grabbed the second Kill-O-Zap
gun, blasted a perfectly harmless accounting computer and rushed out into
the corridor, followed by the others. He very nearly blasted hell out of an
aircar that stood waiting for them a few yards away. The aircar was empty,
but Arthur recognized it as belonging to Slartibartfast.
It had a note from him pinned to part of its sparse instrument panel. The
note had an arrow drawn on it, pointing at one of the controls.
It said, This is probably the best button to press.
The aircar rocketed them at speeds in excess of R17 through the steel tunnels
that lead out onto the appalling surface of the planet which was now in the
grip of yet another drear morning twilight. Ghastly grey lights congealed on
the land.
R is a velocity measure, defined as a reasonable speed of travel that
is consistent with health, mental wellbeing and not being more than say
five minutes late. It is therefore clearly an almost infinitely variable figure
according to circumstances, since the first two factors vary not only with
speed taken as an absolute, but also with awareness of the third factor. Unless
handled with tranquility this equation can result in considerable stress, ulcers
and even death.
R17 is not a fixed velocity, but it is clearly far too fast.
The aircar flung itself through the air at R17 and above, deposited them
next to the Heart of Gold which stood starkly on the frozen ground like
a bleached bone, and then precipitately hurled itself back in the direction
whence they had come, presumably on important business of its own.
Shivering, the four of them stood and looked at the ship.
Beside it stood another one.
It was the Blagulon Kappa policecraft, a bulbous sharklike affair, slate
green in colour and smothered with black stencilled letters of varying degrees
of size and unfriendliness. The letters informed anyone who cared to read
them as to where the ship was from, what section of the police it was assigned
to, and where the power feeds should be connected.
It seemed somehow unnaturally dark and silent, even for a ship whose twoman
crew was at that moment lying asphyxicated in a smoke-filled chamber
several miles beneath the ground. It is one of those curious things that is
impossible to explain or define, but one can sense when a ship is completely
dead.
Ford could sense it and found it most mysterious – a ship and two policemen
seemed to have gone spontaneously dead. In his experience the Universe
simply didn’t work like that.
The other three could sense it too, but they could sense the bitter cold
even more and hurried back into the Heart of Gold suffering from an acute
attack of no curiosity.
Ford stayed, and went to examine the Blagulon ship. As he walked, he
nearly tripped over an inert steel figure lying face down in the cold dust.
He jacked himself up to his feet and stood resolutely facing the opposite
direction.
That night, as the Heart of Gold was busy putting a few light years between
itself and the Horsehead Nebula, Zaphod lounged under the small palm tree
on the bridge trying to bang his brain into shape with massive Pan Galactic
Gargle Blasters; Ford and Trillian sat in a corner discussing life and matters
arising from it; and Arthur took to his bed to flip through Ford’s copy of The
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy. Since he was going to live in the place, he
reasoned, he’d better start finding out something about it.
He came across this entry.
